---
layout: post
comments: false
title: "Schemes"
tags: mathematics
---

# Sheaves
## Presheaves
A *presheaf* is a way to assign rings/groups/sets to every open set of a topological space. The motivation comes from rings of smooth functions on manifolds.[^1] Let $$U$$ be an open set in a manifold. We can assign a ring $$\mathscr{F}(U) = \{f : U \to \mathbb{R} \, \mid \, f \, \text{ smooth} \}$$. To generalise this to arbitrary rings, we note the following properties of $$\mathscr{F}$$:

- (Restriction) If $$U \subset V$$, then an element in $$\mathscr{F}(V)$$ restricts to an element in $$\mathscr{F}(U)$$.
- (Associativity) If $$U \subset V \subset W$$, directly restricting from $$W$$ to $$U$$ is the same as restricting from $$W$$ to $$V$$ and then from $$V$$ to $$U$$.

Both of these are packaged nicely in the definition of a functor. Let $$X$$ be a topological space and $$\mathrm{Open}(X)^{\mathrm{op}}$$ be the category where the objects are open sets of $$X$$ and there is a unique morphism $$U \to V$$ if $$V \subseteq U$$. A *presheaf of rings* is a functor $$\mathscr{F}: \mathrm{Open}(X)^{\mathrm{op}} \to \mathbf{Ring}$$. The target category can be replaced by $$\mathbf{Ab}$$ for a presheaf of abelian groups and so on. $$\mathscr F$$ acts on morphisms $$U \to V$$ by giving a *restriction map* $$\mathrm{res}_{UV}$$.

## Examples

- The functor assigning an open set its ring of continuous/differentiable/smooth functions is a presheaf.
- The functor assigning an open set its set of *locally constant* functions is also a presheaf.

## Sheaves 
We actually add 2 more conditions, motivated by the ring of differentiable functions: Let $$\{U_i\}_{i \in I}$$ be an open cover of $$U \subset X$$.
- If there are two elements $$f,g\in \mathscr{F}(U)$$ such that for all $$i$$, $$\mathrm{res}_{U U_i}(f) = \mathrm{res}_{U U_i}(g)$$, then $$f=g$$.
- If, for all $$i$$, there is an element $$s_i \in \mathscr{F}(U_i)$$ such that for all $$i$$ and $$j$$, $$\mathrm{res}_{U_i, U_i \cap U_j}(s_i) = \mathrm{res}_{U_j, U_i \cap U_j}(s_j)$$, then there is an element $$s \in \mathscr{F}(U)$$ such that $$\mathrm{res}_{U,U_i}(s) = s_i$$.

# Spectra
Let $$R$$ be a ring. In algebraic geometry, the primary object we study is the *spectrum* $$\mathrm{Spec}\, R$$, which is the set of prime ideals of $$R$$. A ring morphism $$\phi: R \to S$$ induces a map of spectra $$\phi^\ast: \mathrm{Spec}\, S \to \mathrm{Spec}\, R$$ defined by $$\mathfrak{q} \mapsto \phi^{-1}(\mathfrak{q})$$. The motivation is from varieties, where $$R$$ is considered as a coordinate ring and $$\mathrm{Spec} \, R$$ is the set of points, although in the case of varieties we only consider maximal ideals.

If $$f \in R$$, we say its *value* $$f(\mathfrak p)$$ at $$\mathfrak p \in \mathrm{Spec} \, R$$ is its image under the composite morphism $$R \to R/\mathfrak p \to \kappa(R/\mathfrak p)$$. This is not a function in the conventional sense since the codomain is different in general. For example, consider $$R = \mathbb{C}[x]$$. The value of $$x+2$$ at $$(x-2)$$ and $$(x+2)$$ is $$4 \pmod{(x-2)}$$ and $$0 \pmod{(x+2)}$$, corresponding to plugging in 2 and -2 respectively, as expected.

Motivated by the case of varieties, we want to define *vanishing sets* for subsets $$S \subset R$$, thinking of $$S$$ as a set of polynomials. We might then say that $$V(S)$$ is the set of prime ideals $$\mathfrak p$$ so that for all $$f \in S$$, $$f(\mathfrak p) = 0$$, or simply that $$S$$ goes to $$0$$ under the quotient morphism $$R \to R/\mathfrak p$$, and that it is therefore a subset of $$\mathfrak p$$. Our definition is:
- $$V(S) = \{\mathfrak p \in \mathrm{Spec}\, R \, \mid \, S \subseteq \mathfrak{p}\}$$

A morphism $$R \to S$$ of schemes can be thought of as the $$R$$-valued points of $$S$$.

Here are two examples of non-affine schemes:
- Let $$U = \mathbb{A}^2_k \setminus \{[(x,y)]\}$$, the affine plane without the origin. Then $$U$$, as an open subscheme of $$\mathbb{A}^2_k$$, is not affine. Since its ring of functions is $$k[x,y]$$, we could take global sections and get $$U \cong \mathbb{A}^2_k$$, but $$V(x) \cap V(y) = \varnothing$$.

---

[^1]: Much of algebraic geometry is developed in analogy with differential geometry.

